Precise and Accurate Short-term Forecasting of Solar Energetic Particle Events with
Multivariate Time-series Classifiers


SEPs observed in near-Earth space are rare events compared to major flares and CMEs. In addition, the occurrences of SEPs
are dependent on precursor solar eruptions (E. W. Cliver et al. 2022; S. Rotti & P. C. Martens 2023). Thus, it makes physical
sense to build SEP predictive models based on the parameters of parent solar events. However, in the present work we
consider only SFs and decline to use CME data on account of the low quality, such as the projection effects and difficulty of
tracking them as three-dimensional objects.









Methodology

We examine the performance of time-series classifiers in the framework of a binary classification task for predicting SEP events. Time-series classification uses supervised ML to analyze labeled classes of time-series data and then predicts the class to which a new instance belongs.

In the present work, we implement three time-series classifiers and compare their performance to establish certainty in our SEP event prediction system... The statistical features generated by each classifier on samples of the original time series are ensembled to create a single output.



Summary Statistic Classifier

The feature-based SSC is the first of the two baseline models we have used in this work. This classifier applies a time-series
feature transformation to an entire univariate time series using simple summary statistics and builds a random forest using
these summary statistics. 
The summary statistics extracted are mean, standard deviation, minimum, maximum, and quantile values (at 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75). The tabulated summary statistics are then fed to a random forest classifier for training a univariate time-series classifier.



One-nearest Neighbor

In this work, we implement a knearest neighbor (kNN, with k = 1) classifier with dynamic time warping (DTW)... This 1NN is a baseline classifier for time-series classification and, similar to our earlier approaches, we use 1NN with DTW distance to issue predictions.


































In this work, we approach the SEP event short-term prediction problem from a time-series classification perspective... Our data set constitutes in situ time-series measurements from the NOAA GOES missions for solar cycles 22 to 24. We utilize the long-band (1–8 Å) X-ray measurements from the XRS instrument and proton fluxes (P3, P5, and P7) from the SEM instrument on board the GOES missions...

Our goal is to develop robust models that can successfully find discriminants between SEP and SEP-quiet patterns. In our
recent study (S. A. Rotti et al. 2024), we found our methodology of using an ensemble of feature-based univariate
time-series classifiers to perform very well in classifying between strong and weak SEP events.

In our model analysis phase, we used the Youden index (J) to understand the trade-off between the TPR and the FPR at different classification thresholds. That is, we estimate an optimal threshold that provides a TPR with an acceptable FPR to make decisions using our classifiers.

For a 60 minutes prediction window, we obtain the following scores for STSF: TSS = 0.850, HSS = 0.878, GSS = 0.783, and MCC = 0.879.
In summary, our results are promising and provide a gateway for our model architecture to be used in an operational context
to offer short-term predictions on the arrival of strong SEP events up to 60 minutes. The data set and coding methodology
of our model implementation have been made publicly available on the Harvard Dataverse (doi:10.7910/DVN/MWY6H7) under a
Creative Commons license.